---
layout: post
published: true
title: "Lesson 2: Linear Regression"
headline: "Now we're getting started"
mathjax: true
featured: true
comments: false
---
To introduce you to some of the fundamental ideas behind machine learning, we’ll start off with a lesson on perhaps the simplest type of supervised learning: linear regression. In it, you’ll learn what it means to create a machine learning model, and how we can evaluate and eventually train such models.

This chapter will be pretty math-heavy, so take your time getting through it if you have to. Almost everything we see from here will build on these ideas.

Many of the images in this lesson come from Andrew Ng’s Machine Learning course on Coursera. If you have time, we recommend that you give some of his videos a watch.

Introduction: The Regression Problem
------
In our first (introductory) lesson, we learned that supervised learning is a way to use labeled examples to teach a program to map from A (input) to B (output) — or in more mathematical terms, from x (input) to y (output). Regression is a specific type of supervised learning where both the input and output are continuous (e.g. numerical values, such as someone’s height), as opposed to discrete (e.g. classifying cats vs. dogs).

As an example, let’s imagine that we want to be able to predict the price of a house (y) from the size of the house (x), as measured in square feet. To help us do so, we have been giving a dataset of houses from Portland, Oregon. Each data point (or **training example**) includes information on the size of the house (our known input, AKA **feature**) and the house’s price (what we want to eventually be able to predict).

Let’s say that the dataset looks something like this:
$$y = mx + b$$
